P2: A Lightweight Database Management System Generator
******************************************************

Abstract
********

   A "lightweight database management system" ("LWDB") is a
high-performance, application-specific DBMS.  It differs from a general
purpose (heavyweight) DBMS in that it omits one or more features and
specializes the implementation of the remaining features to meet the
needs of individual applications.  Existing LWDBs are hand-coded
monolithic systems which are expensive to build and tune.  P2 is an
extensible LWDB based on GenVoca software system generation technology.
P2 provides a library of interchangeable, plug-compatible components
and an optimizing compiler that automatically constructs LWDBs that are
customized to the needs of target applications.

   P2 currently provides only a subset of its potential features, but
preliminary experiments indicate that P2 offers substantial programmer
productivity and generated code performance advantages over hand coding.

Distribution
************

   The P2 program and manuals can be retrieved via anonymous ftp.
*Note Installation::.

   CONTACT INFORMATION:

     Don Batory
     University of Texas at Austin
     Department of Computer Science
     Taylor Hall 2.124
     Austin TX 78712.
     
     `dsb@cs.utexas.edu'

Installation
************

   The P2 distribution consists of two compressed tar files available
via anonymous ftp.  One tar file contains the P2 system code, the other
contains the P2 system manuals.

   As a rule, we have tried to make P2 as portable as possible.  One
exception to this rule is that P2 requires GNU `make'.

   *Standard UNIX `make' will not work.*

   Besides GNU `make', the code distribution requires an `ANSI C'
compiler, `lex' and `yacc' (or their GNU equivalents).  The manuals
distribution includes PostScript and dvi versions of the manual, and
thus requires only a PostScript or dvi viewer.

   To install the code distribution, you should get the file via ftp,
uncompress it, un-tar it, cd into it, run configure, and make.  This
distribution should install without modification ("out of the box") on
at least the following systems:

       AIX 3.2
       Solaris 2.4
       SunOS 4.1
       ULTRIX 4.2

   Here is a step-by-step example of how to get the code distribution
and make it on your system.  This example assumes your login is
`dsb@cs.utexas.edu', and you wish to install P2 in the directory
`/u/dsb/foo/p2'.

       % ftp ftp.cs.utexas.edu
       Name (ftp.cs.utexas.edu:dsb): anonymous
       Password: dsb@cs.utexas.edu
       ftp> binary
       ftp> cd pub/predator
       ftp> get p2-0.9.9.tar.Z
       ftp> bye
       % uncompress p2-0.9.9.tar.Z
       % tar xf p2-0.9.9.tar
       % cd p2-0.9.9
       % ./configure --prefix=/u/dsb/foo/p2
       % make
       % make install

   Once compiled, the code distribution (source plus object files)
requires about 35 megabytes of disk space.

   To install the manuals distribution, you should get the file via
ftp, uncompress it, and un-tar it.

   Here is a step-by-step example of how to get the manuals
distribution.  This example assumes your login is `dsb@cs.utexas.edu'.

       % ftp ftp.cs.utexas.edu
       Name (ftp.cs.utexas.edu:dsb): anonymous
       Password: dsb@cs.utexas.edu
       ftp> binary
       ftp> cd pub/predator
       ftp> get p2-manuals-0.9.9.tar.Z
       ftp> bye
       % uncompress p2-manuals-0.9.9.tar.Z
       % tar xf p2-manuals-0.9.9.tar

   The manuals distribution requires about 1 megabyte of disk space.

