@c $Id: adv-invoking.texi,v 45.0 1997/09/19 05:42:01 jthomas Exp $
@c Copyright (C) 1994, The University of Texas at Austin.

@node Invoking the P2 Programs, Layer Composition Checks, xp Operations, Top
@chapter Invoking the P2 Programs

The programs @file{ddl}, @file{xp}, and @file{pb} all take short and
long option forms (one hyphen or two). All of them can display the
current version using @code{-v} or @code{--version}. All of them can
display the list of command line options using @code{-h} or @code{--help}.


@menu
* ddl options::                 Options for the ddl program
* xp options::                  Options for the xp program
* pb options::                  Options for the pb program
@end menu

@node ddl options, xp options, Invoking the P2 Programs, Invoking the P2 Programs
@section ddl options

@example
@code{ddl} @var{options} filename[@code{.ddl}] 
@end example

@defvr {ddl Option} @code{-d}
@defvrx {ddl Option} @code{--debug-yacc}
Display the tokens parsed by ddl.
@end defvr

@defvr {ddl Option} @code{-h}
@defvrx {ddl Option} @code{--help}
Display the list of valid command line options and quit. 
@end defvr

@defvr {ddl Option} @code{-w}
@defvrx {ddl Option} @code{--warnings}
Display warnings. 
@end defvr

@defvr {ddl Option} @code{-v}
@defvrx {ddl Option} @code{--version}
Display the version number of the program and quit.
@end defvr


@node xp options, pb options, ddl options, Invoking the P2 Programs
@section xp options

@example
@code{xp} @var{options} filename[@code{.xp}]
@end example

@defvr {xp Option} @code{-h}
@defvrx {xp Options} @code{--help}
Display the command line options for xp and quit.
@end defvr

@defvr {xp Option} @code{-c}
@defvrx {xp Options} @code{--hierarchy-comments}
For every procedure in the layer, write out a comment string containing
the name of the procedure at the beginning and the end of the
procedure. This is known as a @dfn{hierarchical comment}. 
Used in conjunction with the @code{-c} flag below for debugging. 
@end defvr

@defvr {xp Option} @code{-v}
@defvrx {xp Options} @code{--version}
Display the version number of xp and quit.
@end defvr

@defvr {xp Option} @code{-w}
@defvrx {xp Options} @code{--warnings}
Display all warnings. The default is not to display any warnings. 
@end defvr

@defvr {xp Option} @code{-d}
@defvrx {xp Options} @code{--debug-yacc}
Display the tokens parsed by xp. 
@end defvr

@node pb options,  , xp options, Invoking the P2 Programs
@section pb options

@example
@code{pb} @var{options} filename[@code{.pb}] 
@end example

@defvr {pb Option} @code{-h}
@defvrx {pb Option} @code{--help}
Display the options for pb and quit.
@end defvr

@defvr {pb Option} @code{-a}
@defvrx {pb Option} @code{--attribute-file} 
Read the attribute file for design rule checking from @var{filename}.
@end defvr

@defvr {pb Option} @code{-v}
@defvrx {pb Option} @code{--version}
Display the version number of pb and quit.
@end defvr

@defvr {pb Option} @code{-d}
@defvrx {pb Option} @code{--debug-yacc}
Display the tokens parsed by pb. 
@end defvr

@defvr {pb Option} @code{-w}
@defvrx {pb Option} @code{--warnings}
Display all warnings. The default is not to display any warnings. 
@end defvr

@defvr {pb Option} @code{-c}
@defvrx {pb Option} @code{--hierarchical-comments}
If a layer is compiled with hierarchical comments (see @code{-c (xp)} above),
then this flag will allow the hierarchical comments to pass through to
the generated C code. 
@end defvr
