@c $Id: installation.texi,v 45.0 1997/09/19 05:42:03 jthomas Exp $
@c Copyright (C) 1996, The University of Texas at Austin.

@node    Installation, Introduction, Distribution, Top
@chapter Installation
@cindex P2, installation
@cindex installation

@include version.texi

The P2 distribution consists of two compressed tar files available
via anonymous ftp.  One tar file contains the P2 system code,
the other contains the P2 system manuals.

As a rule, we have tried to make P2 as portable as possible.
One exception to this rule is that P2 requires GNU @code{make}.

@emph{Standard UNIX @code{make} will not work.}

Besides GNU @code{make}, the code distribution
requires an @code{ANSI C} compiler,
@code{lex} and @code{yacc} (or their GNU equivalents).
The manuals distribution includes PostScript and dvi
versions of the manual, and thus requires only a
PostScript or dvi viewer.

To install the code distribution, you should get the file via
ftp, uncompress it, un-tar it, cd into it, run configure, and make.
This distribution should install without modification ("out of the box")
on at least the following systems:

@example
@group
  AIX 3.2
  Solaris 2.4
  SunOS 4.1
  ULTRIX 4.2
@end group
@end example

Here is a step-by-step example of how to get the code
distribution and make it on your system.
This example assumes your login is @code{dsb@@cs.utexas.edu},
and you wish to install P2 in the directory @code{/u/dsb/foo/p2}.

@example
@group
  % ftp ftp.cs.utexas.edu
  Name (ftp.cs.utexas.edu:dsb): anonymous
  Password: dsb@@cs.utexas.edu
  ftp> binary
  ftp> cd pub/predator
  ftp> get p2-@value{VERSION}.tar.Z
  ftp> bye
  % uncompress p2-@value{VERSION}.tar.Z
  % tar xf p2-@value{VERSION}.tar
  % cd p2-@value{VERSION}
  % ./configure --prefix=/u/dsb/foo/p2
  % make
  % make install  
@end group
@end example

Once compiled, the code distribution (source plus object files) requires
about 35 megabytes of disk space.

To install the manuals distribution, you should get the file via
ftp, uncompress it, and un-tar it.

Here is a step-by-step example of how to get the manuals distribution.
This example assumes your login is @code{dsb@@cs.utexas.edu}.

@example
@group
  % ftp ftp.cs.utexas.edu
  Name (ftp.cs.utexas.edu:dsb): anonymous
  Password: dsb@@cs.utexas.edu
  ftp> binary
  ftp> cd pub/predator
  ftp> get p2-manuals-@value{VERSION}.tar.Z
  ftp> bye
  % uncompress p2-manuals-@value{VERSION}.tar.Z
  % tar xf p2-manuals-@value{VERSION}.tar
@end group
@end example

The manuals distribution requires about 1 megabyte of disk space.
