@c $Id: p2-adv.top.texinfo,v 45.0 1997/09/19 05:42:08 jthomas Exp $
@c Copyright (C) 1994, The University of Texas at Austin.

@ifinfo
@node Top, Agreement, (dir), (dir)
@top The Advanced P2 System

This document describes advanced features of the P2 system. 

This document applies to version @value{VERSION} 
of the program system @code{P2}. This manual 
is Edition @value{EDITION}, updated @value{UPDATED}.

@end ifinfo

@c =================================================

@menu
* Agreement::                   Copyright License Agreement.
* Introduction::                Brief description of this file.
* xp Manual::                   How to interpret and write xp files.
* xp Operations::               Operations available in xp files. 
* Invoking the P2 Programs::    Options for the programs xp, pb, and ddl.
* Layer Composition Checks::    Semantic checking of type expressions.
* Concept Index::               
* Functions and Variables Index::
* dlist.xp program::
@end menu

@c =================================================

@iftex
@unnumbered Preface

    This manual documents advanced usage of the P2 system and is the
companion document to @file{Introductory P2 System Manual}.
It also outlines how experts can customize the system for sophisticated
applications. 

In addition to the usual index of concepts, this manual provides
indices of all functions and variables. 

This manual is available in both a printed format and on on-line
format. The on-line format can be browsed by the using the GNU "info"
program or the GNU emacs "info" command.
@end iftex

@c =================================================

@include adv-agreement.texi
@include adv-introduction.texi
@include xp-manual.texi
@include xp-operations.texi
@include adv-invoking.texi
@include drc.texi

@include adv-concept-index.texi
@include adv-function-index.texi
@include dlist.xp.texi

@c =================================================
