@c $Id: p2-intro.top.texinfo,v 45.0 1997/09/19 05:42:08 jthomas Exp $
@c Copyright (C) 1994, The University of Texas at Austin.

@ifinfo
@node Top, Agreement, (dir), (dir)
@top The Introductory P2 System

This document describes the P2 system. 

This document applies to version @value{VERSION} 
of the program system @code{P2}. This manual 
is Edition @value{EDITION}, updated @value{UPDATED}.

@end ifinfo

@c =================================================

@menu
* Agreement::                   Copyright License Agreement.
* Introduction::                Theory behind P2.  Program descriptions.
* Distribution::                Getting P2 and reporting bugs.
* Installation::                Hot to install P2 on your system.
* P2 Language::                 Constructs in the P2 language.
* P2 Operations::               Operations in the P2 language.
* P2 Layers::                   Individual layers in the P2 system.
* Invoking P2::                 Options for P2.
* P2 Bibliography::             Publications related to the P2 system.
* Concept Index::               
* Functions and Variables Index::  
* Example P2 program::          The sample.p2 file.
@end menu

@c =================================================

@iftex
@unnumbered Preface

    This manual documents the use of the P2 system. 
It also outlines how programmerrs can customize the system for sophisticated
applications.
First-time users are encouraged to read this manual.
Advanced users are encouraged to read
@file{Advanced P2 System Manual}.

In addition to the usual index of concepts, this manual provides
separate indices of all functions and variables. 

This manual is available in both a printed format and on on-line
format. The on-line format can be browsed by the using the GNU info
program or the GNU emacs info command.
@end iftex

@c =================================================

@include intro-agreement.texi
@include distribution.texi
@include installation.texi
@include intro-introduction.texi
@include language.texi
@include operations.texi
@include layers.texi
@include intro-invoking.texi
@include bibliography.texi

@include intro-concept-index.texi
@include intro-function-index.texi

@node Example P2 program, , Functions and Variables Index, Top
@appendix Example P2 program

Below is the complete P2 program, @file{sample.p2}.

@smallexample
@c sample.p2.texi is generated automatically
@c from paces/sample.p2.texi by paces/Makefile.in (JAT)
@include sample.p2.texi
@end smallexample

@c =================================================
